README.md, before:

# TilleRS - Keyboard-First Tiling Window Manager for macOS

TilleRS automatically organizes windows into logical workspaces, enabling instant context switching between projects while maintaining predictable window layouts across multiple monitors.

## Overview

TilleRS helps macOS power users stay in flow by organizing windows into logical workspaces and providing instant, keyboard-driven context switching. Built in Rust for performance and reliability, TilleRS features **Option-key shortcuts** for better macOS integration and modern window management workflows.

## Status

✅ **Production Ready** - Complete implementation with full feature set:
- ✅ Workspace management with CRUD operations and persistence
- ✅ Window tiling with multiple algorithms (Master-Stack, Grid, Columns)
- ✅ Option-key shortcuts with automatic Command-key migration
- ✅ macOS Accessibility API integration
- ✅ CLI interface for configuration and debugging
- ✅ System tray integration with status indicators
- ✅ Error recovery and permission management
- ✅ Performance benchmarking and memory monitoring

## Current Capabilities

- Create and manage workspaces with validation, event emission, and metrics tracking via `WorkspaceManager`
- Maintain keyboard shortcut mappings with conflict detection and Option-key enforcement through `KeyboardHandler`
- Rich domain models for tiling patterns, window rules, monitor configurations, and application profiles
- Structured tracing instrumentation for diagnostics (`tillers=debug,info`)

## Roadmap

- Integrate with macOS Accessibility APIs for real window placement and focus management
- Expose workspace operations through a command-line interface and user-facing UI layer
- Flesh out contract and integration tests in `tests/integration_tests.rs` and Criterion benchmarks in `benches/`
- Persist configuration to `~/.config/tillers/` and support live reload of workspace layouts

## Requirements

- macOS 12.0 (Monterey) or later
- Accessibility permissions for window management
- Input monitoring permissions for global shortcuts

## Installation

### Quick Install

```bash
# Download and install TilleRS
curl -L https://github.com/tillers/tillers/releases/latest/download/tillers-macos.tar.gz | tar xz
sudo cp tillers /usr/local/bin/
```

### From Source

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/tillers/tillers
cd tillers

# Build the project
cargo build --release

# Install binary
cargo install --path .
```

### macOS Permissions Setup

TilleRS requires specific macOS permissions to function properly:

1. **Accessibility Permission** (Required for window management):
   - Open System Preferences → Security & Privacy → Privacy
   - Select "Accessibility" from the sidebar
   - Click the lock icon and enter your password
   - Click "+" and add TilleRS executable
   - Check the box next to TilleRS

2. **Input Monitoring Permission** (Required for global shortcuts):
   - In the same Privacy settings
   - Select "Input Monitoring" from the sidebar  
   - Click "+" and add TilleRS executable
   - Check the box next to TilleRS

3. **Restart TilleRS** after granting permissions

### First Run

```bash
# Start TilleRS
tillers

# Or run in daemon mode
tillers --daemon
```

For a step-by-step walkthrough (including Option-key migration guidance), see
`docs/installation.md`.

## Usage

### Run the Demo

The current binary boots the async services, creates a default workspace, and logs activity. Run it with tracing enabled to inspect the flow:

```bash
RUST_LOG=tillers=debug,info cargo run
```

Watch the log output for workspace creation, activation, and keyboard shortcut migration events. CLI subcommands such as `tillers workspace list` are not implemented yet and are tracked on the roadmap.

### Keyboard Shortcuts (Option-Key Defaults)

TilleRS uses **Option (⌥)** as the primary modifier for better macOS integration:

#### Workspace Management
| Shortcut | Action |
|----------|--------|
| `Option + 1-9` | Switch to workspace 1-9 |
| `Option + Shift + 1-9` | Move current window to workspace 1-9 |
| `Option + Tab` | Switch to next workspace |
| `Option + Shift + Tab` | Switch to previous workspace |
| `Option + N` | Create new workspace |
| `Option + W` | Close current workspace |

#### Window Management  
| Shortcut | Action |
|----------|--------|
| `Option + H` | Tile windows horizontally |
| `Option + V` | Tile windows vertically |
| `Option + G` | Apply grid layout |
| `Option + M` | Maximize focused window |
| `Option + R` | Restore window layout |

#### Application Control
| Shortcut | Action |
|----------|--------|
| `Option + Space` | Show TilleRS menu |
| `Option + ,` | Open preferences |
| `Option + /` | Show help |
| `Option + Q` | Quit TilleRS |

### Migration from Command-Key Shortcuts

**Automatic Migration**: TilleRS automatically detects and converts legacy Command-key shortcuts to Option-key equivalents:

```bash
# Your old config with cmd shortcuts gets automatically converted:
# cmd+1        → opt+1
# cmd+shift+1  → opt+shift+1  
# cmd+space    → opt+space
```

**Why Option Instead of Command?**
- ✅ **System Compatibility**: Avoids conflicts with macOS system shortcuts (⌘+Space, ⌘+Tab, etc.)
- ✅ **Application Safety**: Most apps don't use Option combinations extensively  
- ✅ **Modern Standard**: Follows contemporary macOS window manager conventions
- ✅ **Accessibility**: Better integration with macOS accessibility features

**Manual Migration**: Update your config file if needed:
```toml
# ~/.config/tillers/config.toml
[[keyboard_mappings]]
shortcut_combination = "opt+1"  # Use "opt" instead of "cmd"
action_type = "SwitchToWorkspace"
```

## CLI Usage

### Workspace Management

```bash
# List all workspaces
tillers workspace list

# Create workspace with Option shortcut
tillers workspace create "Development" --description "Main coding workspace" --shortcut "opt+1"

# Switch to workspace
tillers workspace switch "Development"

# Delete workspace
tillers workspace delete "Old Project" --force
```

### System Management

```bash
# Check system status and permissions
tillers permissions status

# Request missing permissions (opens System Preferences)
tillers permissions request

# Get permission setup instructions
tillers permissions instructions

# Check system health
tillers diagnostics health

# View system information
tillers diagnostics system
```

### Configuration Management

```bash
# Show current configuration
tillers config show

# Validate configuration file
tillers config validate --file ~/.config/tillers/config.toml

# Export configuration
tillers config export --output backup.toml

# Import configuration with migration
tillers config import new-config.toml --merge
```

## Configuration

TilleRS uses TOML configuration files located at `~/.config/tillers/`:

```toml
# ~/.config/tillers/config.toml
version = "1.0.0"

[config]
# Workspaces with Option-key shortcuts
[[config.workspaces]]
id = "550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000"
name = "Development"
description = "Main development workspace"
kind = "Standard"

# Tiling patterns
[[config.patterns]]
id = "660e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440001"
name = "Master-Stack"
layout_algorithm = "MasterStack"
main_area_ratio = 0.6
gap_size = 10
window_margin = 20

# Option-key keyboard mappings (recommended)
[[config.keyboard_mappings]]
shortcut_combination = "opt+1"
action_type = "SwitchToWorkspace"
target_id = "550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000"
enabled = true

[[config.keyboard_mappings]]
shortcut_combination = "opt+shift+1"
action_type = "MoveToWorkspace"
target_id = "550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000"
enabled = true

# Application profiles
[[config.application_profiles]]
application_bundle_id = "com.apple.Terminal"
application_name = "Terminal"
settings = { default_workspace_id = "550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000", auto_tile = true }
```

## Development

### Prerequisites

- Rust 1.75 or later
- Xcode Command Line Tools

### Building

```bash
# Development build
cargo build

# Release build with optimizations
cargo build --release

# Run tests (many integration tests intentionally panic until features land)
cargo test

# Run with debug logging
RUST_LOG=debug cargo run
```

### Testing & Benchmarks

```bash
# Run all tests
cargo test

# Run integration test bundle (expected to fail until contract work lands)
cargo test --test integration_tests

# Build and run performance benchmarks
cargo bench
```

### Code Quality

```bash
# Format code
cargo fmt --all

# Run linter
cargo clippy -- -D warnings
```

### API Documentation

```bash
# Build public API docs without dependency pages
RUSTC_VERSION="$(rustc --version)" cargo doc --no-deps

# Open the rendered output
open target/doc/tillers/index.html
```

See `docs/rustdoc.md` for additional tips (e.g., docs.rs flags, publishing guidance).

## Architecture

```
src/
├── config/          # Configuration loading and defaults
├── lib.rs           # Crate exports and error types
├── macos/           # macOS integration scaffolding
├── main.rs          # Demo entry point wiring services together
├── models/          # Domain models (Workspace, TilingPattern, KeyboardMapping, ...)
├── services/        # Async services (WorkspaceManager, KeyboardHandler, TilingEngine, ...)
├── ui/              # Placeholder for future UI integrations
└── ...

benches/             # Criterion benchmarks (workspace switching, window positioning)
tests/               # Contract and integration tests (currently red by design)
resources/           # macOS bundle metadata (Info.plist, entitlements)
```

### Key Components

- **WorkspaceManager**: Handles workspace creation, switching, validation, and emits events/metrics
- **KeyboardHandler**: Registers shortcuts, enforces Option modifiers, and surfaces shortcut events
- **TilingEngine**: Calculates window layouts (implementation in progress)
- **macos module**: Provides the bridge into macOS Accessibility APIs (currently scaffolding)

## Performance Targets

- Workspace switching under 200 ms (95th percentile)
- Window positioning under 50 ms
- Memory usage below 100 MB during normal operation
- Idle CPU utilization below 1%

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Make your changes following the coding standards
4. Add tests for new functionality (or mark TODOs when features are still in flight)
5. Run the test suite (`cargo test`)
6. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
7. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
8. Open a Pull Request

### Development Guidelines

- Follow Rust naming conventions
- Use `cargo fmt --all` before committing
- Ensure `cargo clippy -- -D warnings` passes
- Document public APIs and keep specs/contracts in sync
- Test on multiple macOS versions when possible

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Support

- **Issues**: [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/tillers/tillers/issues)
- **Discussions**: [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/tillers/tillers/discussions)
- **Documentation**: [Wiki](https://github.com/tillers/tillers/wiki)

## Acknowledgments

- Built with [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/)
- Uses [cocoa-rs](https://github.com/servo/core-foundation-rs) for macOS integration
- Inspired by [yabai](https://github.com/koekeishiya/yabai) and [Amethyst](https://github.com/ianyh/Amethyst)

Commit message:

Add warning for this project

README.md, after:

# TilleRS - Keyboard-First Tiling Window Manager for macOS

> [!WARNING]
> **🚨 EXPERIMENTAL PROJECT - DO NOT USE ON YOUR MACBOOK**
> 
> This is an experimental demonstration for AI-powered development tools (Spec-Kit, Claude Code, Codex) and is **NOT intended for production use**. See [WARNING.md](WARNING.md) for details.

TilleRS automatically organizes windows into logical workspaces, enabling instant context switching between projects while maintaining predictable window layouts across multiple monitors.

## Overview

TilleRS helps macOS power users stay in flow by organizing windows into logical workspaces and providing instant, keyboard-driven context switching. Built in Rust for performance and reliability, TilleRS features **Option-key shortcuts** for better macOS integration and modern window management workflows.

## Status

✅ **Production Ready** - Complete implementation with full feature set:
- ✅ Workspace management with CRUD operations and persistence
- ✅ Window tiling with multiple algorithms (Master-Stack, Grid, Columns)
- ✅ Option-key shortcuts with automatic Command-key migration
- ✅ macOS Accessibility API integration
- ✅ CLI interface for configuration and debugging
- ✅ System tray integration with status indicators
- ✅ Error recovery and permission management
- ✅ Performance benchmarking and memory monitoring

## Current Capabilities

- Create and manage workspaces with validation, event emission, and metrics tracking via `WorkspaceManager`
- Maintain keyboard shortcut mappings with conflict detection and Option-key enforcement through `KeyboardHandler`
- Rich domain models for tiling patterns, window rules, monitor configurations, and application profiles
- Structured tracing instrumentation for diagnostics (`tillers=debug,info`)

## Roadmap

- Integrate with macOS Accessibility APIs for real window placement and focus management
- Expose workspace operations through a command-line interface and user-facing UI layer
- Flesh out contract and integration tests in `tests/integration_tests.rs` and Criterion benchmarks in `benches/`
- Persist configuration to `~/.config/tillers/` and support live reload of workspace layouts

## Requirements

- macOS 12.0 (Monterey) or later
- Accessibility permissions for window management
- Input monitoring permissions for global shortcuts

## Installation

### Quick Install

```bash
# Download and install TilleRS
curl -L https://github.com/tillers/tillers/releases/latest/download/tillers-macos.tar.gz | tar xz
sudo cp tillers /usr/local/bin/
```

### From Source

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/tillers/tillers
cd tillers

# Build the project
cargo build --release

# Install binary
cargo install --path .
```

### macOS Permissions Setup

TilleRS requires specific macOS permissions to function properly:

1. **Accessibility Permission** (Required for window management):
   - Open System Preferences → Security & Privacy → Privacy
   - Select "Accessibility" from the sidebar
   - Click the lock icon and enter your password
   - Click "+" and add TilleRS executable
   - Check the box next to TilleRS

2. **Input Monitoring Permission** (Required for global shortcuts):
   - In the same Privacy settings
   - Select "Input Monitoring" from the sidebar  
   - Click "+" and add TilleRS executable
   - Check the box next to TilleRS

3. **Restart TilleRS** after granting permissions

### First Run

```bash
# Start TilleRS
tillers

# Or run in daemon mode
tillers --daemon
```

For a step-by-step walkthrough (including Option-key migration guidance), see
`docs/installation.md`.

## Usage

### Run the Demo

The current binary boots the async services, creates a default workspace, and logs activity. Run it with tracing enabled to inspect the flow:

```bash
RUST_LOG=tillers=debug,info cargo run
```

Watch the log output for workspace creation, activation, and keyboard shortcut migration events. CLI subcommands such as `tillers workspace list` are not implemented yet and are tracked on the roadmap.

### Keyboard Shortcuts (Option-Key Defaults)

TilleRS uses **Option (⌥)** as the primary modifier for better macOS integration:

#### Workspace Management
| Shortcut | Action |
|----------|--------|
| `Option + 1-9` | Switch to workspace 1-9 |
| `Option + Shift + 1-9` | Move current window to workspace 1-9 |
| `Option + Tab` | Switch to next workspace |
| `Option + Shift + Tab` | Switch to previous workspace |
| `Option + N` | Create new workspace |
| `Option + W` | Close current workspace |

#### Window Management  
| Shortcut | Action |
|----------|--------|
| `Option + H` | Tile windows horizontally |
| `Option + V` | Tile windows vertically |
| `Option + G` | Apply grid layout |
| `Option + M` | Maximize focused window |
| `Option + R` | Restore window layout |

#### Application Control
| Shortcut | Action |
|----------|--------|
| `Option + Space` | Show TilleRS menu |
| `Option + ,` | Open preferences |
| `Option + /` | Show help |
| `Option + Q` | Quit TilleRS |

### Migration from Command-Key Shortcuts

**Automatic Migration**: TilleRS automatically detects and converts legacy Command-key shortcuts to Option-key equivalents:

```bash
# Your old config with cmd shortcuts gets automatically converted:
# cmd+1        → opt+1
# cmd+shift+1  → opt+shift+1  
# cmd+space    → opt+space
```

**Why Option Instead of Command?**
- ✅ **System Compatibility**: Avoids conflicts with macOS system shortcuts (⌘+Space, ⌘+Tab, etc.)
- ✅ **Application Safety**: Most apps don't use Option combinations extensively  
- ✅ **Modern Standard**: Follows contemporary macOS window manager conventions
- ✅ **Accessibility**: Better integration with macOS accessibility features

**Manual Migration**: Update your config file if needed:
```toml
# ~/.config/tillers/config.toml
[[keyboard_mappings]]
shortcut_combination = "opt+1"  # Use "opt" instead of "cmd"
action_type = "SwitchToWorkspace"
```

## CLI Usage

### Workspace Management

```bash
# List all workspaces
tillers workspace list

# Create workspace with Option shortcut
tillers workspace create "Development" --description "Main coding workspace" --shortcut "opt+1"

# Switch to workspace
tillers workspace switch "Development"

# Delete workspace
tillers workspace delete "Old Project" --force
```

### System Management

```bash
# Check system status and permissions
tillers permissions status

# Request missing permissions (opens System Preferences)
tillers permissions request

# Get permission setup instructions
tillers permissions instructions

# Check system health
tillers diagnostics health

# View system information
tillers diagnostics system
```

### Configuration Management

```bash
# Show current configuration
tillers config show

# Validate configuration file
tillers config validate --file ~/.config/tillers/config.toml

# Export configuration
tillers config export --output backup.toml

# Import configuration with migration
tillers config import new-config.toml --merge
```

## Configuration

TilleRS uses TOML configuration files located at `~/.config/tillers/`:

```toml
# ~/.config/tillers/config.toml
version = "1.0.0"

[config]
# Workspaces with Option-key shortcuts
[[config.workspaces]]
id = "550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000"
name = "Development"
description = "Main development workspace"
kind = "Standard"

# Tiling patterns
[[config.patterns]]
id = "660e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440001"
name = "Master-Stack"
layout_algorithm = "MasterStack"
main_area_ratio = 0.6
gap_size = 10
window_margin = 20

# Option-key keyboard mappings (recommended)
[[config.keyboard_mappings]]
shortcut_combination = "opt+1"
action_type = "SwitchToWorkspace"
target_id = "550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000"
enabled = true

[[config.keyboard_mappings]]
shortcut_combination = "opt+shift+1"
action_type = "MoveToWorkspace"
target_id = "550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000"
enabled = true

# Application profiles
[[config.application_profiles]]
application_bundle_id = "com.apple.Terminal"
application_name = "Terminal"
settings = { default_workspace_id = "550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000", auto_tile = true }
```

## Development

### Prerequisites

- Rust 1.75 or later
- Xcode Command Line Tools

### Building

```bash
# Development build
cargo build

# Release build with optimizations
cargo build --release

# Run tests (many integration tests intentionally panic until features land)
cargo test

# Run with debug logging
RUST_LOG=debug cargo run
```

### Testing & Benchmarks

```bash
# Run all tests
cargo test

# Run integration test bundle (expected to fail until contract work lands)
cargo test --test integration_tests

# Build and run performance benchmarks
cargo bench
```

### Code Quality

```bash
# Format code
cargo fmt --all

# Run linter
cargo clippy -- -D warnings
```

### API Documentation

```bash
# Build public API docs without dependency pages
RUSTC_VERSION="$(rustc --version)" cargo doc --no-deps

# Open the rendered output
open target/doc/tillers/index.html
```

See `docs/rustdoc.md` for additional tips (e.g., docs.rs flags, publishing guidance).

## Architecture

```
src/
├── config/          # Configuration loading and defaults
├── lib.rs           # Crate exports and error types
├── macos/           # macOS integration scaffolding
├── main.rs          # Demo entry point wiring services together
├── models/          # Domain models (Workspace, TilingPattern, KeyboardMapping, ...)
├── services/        # Async services (WorkspaceManager, KeyboardHandler, TilingEngine, ...)
├── ui/              # Placeholder for future UI integrations
└── ...

benches/             # Criterion benchmarks (workspace switching, window positioning)
tests/               # Contract and integration tests (currently red by design)
resources/           # macOS bundle metadata (Info.plist, entitlements)
```

### Key Components

- **WorkspaceManager**: Handles workspace creation, switching, validation, and emits events/metrics
- **KeyboardHandler**: Registers shortcuts, enforces Option modifiers, and surfaces shortcut events
- **TilingEngine**: Calculates window layouts (implementation in progress)
- **macos module**: Provides the bridge into macOS Accessibility APIs (currently scaffolding)

## Performance Targets

- Workspace switching under 200 ms (95th percentile)
- Window positioning under 50 ms
- Memory usage below 100 MB during normal operation
- Idle CPU utilization below 1%

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Make your changes following the coding standards
4. Add tests for new functionality (or mark TODOs when features are still in flight)
5. Run the test suite (`cargo test`)
6. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
7. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
8. Open a Pull Request

### Development Guidelines

- Follow Rust naming conventions
- Use `cargo fmt --all` before committing
- Ensure `cargo clippy -- -D warnings` passes
- Document public APIs and keep specs/contracts in sync
- Test on multiple macOS versions when possible

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Support

- **Issues**: [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/tillers/tillers/issues)
- **Discussions**: [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/tillers/tillers/discussions)
- **Documentation**: [Wiki](https://github.com/tillers/tillers/wiki)

## Acknowledgments

- Built with [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/)
- Uses [cocoa-rs](https://github.com/servo/core-foundation-rs) for macOS integration
- Inspired by [yabai](https://github.com/koekeishiya/yabai) and [Amethyst](https://github.com/ianyh/Amethyst)
